README.md, before:

# bagPipes
***********************

### Overview
***********************
bagPipes is a collection of next-gen sequencing processing pipelines for the Phanstiel Lab.

bagPipes includes pipelines for paired-end RNA-seq data, ChIP-seq/CUT&RUN data, and ATAC-seq data using the Snakemake framework.

This pipeline is inteded to be run on the UNC HPC longleaf cluster with SLURM.

## Running
-----------------------
The `RNApipe` SLURM wrapper will sequentially launch the `RNApipeCore` and `mergeSignal` workflows using the `RNAconfig.yaml` file.

`RNApipeCore` creates quantification files, alignments and signal tracks. Output files are named according to `fileNamesFrom` list in the config file.

`mergeSignal` generates merged alignments and signal tracks based on the `mergeBy` list in the config file. 

For both workflows, stranded signal tracks will be created by default, but can be toggled off using the `stranded` parameter in the config file.

Launch the pipeline using the following command:
```bash
sbatch RNApipe.sh
```

## Workflow
-----------------------
![](dags/RNApipeCoreDAG.png)

## Merging
-----------------------
Follow these steps to create merged signal tracks and alignment files. Requires existing `.bam` and `.bai` files for individual samples from a core run. Determines merging using the `mergeBy` parameter in `config/config.yaml`.  

## Benchmarking
-----------------------
Run the `benchmarking.py` script within `workflows/utils` in order to summarize all existing benchmark files.
```
module load python/3.6.6
python3 ./workflows/utils/benchmarking.py
```

## Unlocking
-----------------------
Use this command when you want to delete a previously generated output and re-run.
```bash
./unlock.sh RNApipe
```

## To-do
-----------------------
**RNApipe**
- Make `fastqc` rule more robust to different file extensions (currently hardcoded to accept `.fastq.gz` only; new param in config?)
- Make creation of the samplesheet a rule
- (Optional) Make output for quant rule (Salmon) accept the directories themselves as outputs
- Consider trying to incorporate the mergeSignal into RNApipeCore 

**ChIPpipe + ATACpipe**
- Create single pipeline for each, compatible with signalMerge script
- Include logic for using either merged- or non-merged aligns for peak calling, depending on `fileNamesFrom`/`mergeBy` params

**This pipeline is still in development. More information to come upon completion!**

Commit message:

Functional ChIPpipe, separated merging
Split merged and unmerged ChIPpipe into separate workflows, incoporated logic into launcher workflow ChIPpipeLauncher. Updated unlock.sh and SLURM launcher. Renamed RNA samplesheet.txt to be more specific

README.md, after:

# bagPipes
***********************

### Overview
***********************
bagPipes is a collection of next-gen sequencing processing pipelines for the Phanstiel Lab.

bagPipes includes pipelines for paired-end RNA-seq data, ChIP-seq/CUT&RUN data, and ATAC-seq data using the Snakemake framework.

This pipeline is inteded to be run on the UNC HPC longleaf cluster with SLURM.

## Running RNApipe
-----------------------
The `RNApipe` SLURM wrapper will sequentially launch the `RNApipeCore` and `mergeSignal` workflows using the `RNAconfig.yaml` file.

`RNApipeCore` creates quantification files, alignments and signal tracks. Output files are named according to `fileNamesFrom` list in the config file.

`mergeSignal` generates merged alignments and signal tracks based on the `mergeBy` list in the config file. 

For both workflows, stranded signal tracks will be created by default, but can be toggled off using the `stranded` parameter in the config file.

Launch the pipeline using the following command:
```bash
sbatch RNApipe.sh
```

## Running RNApipe
-----------------------
The `ChIPpipe` SLURM wrapper will launch either the `ChIPpipe` or `ChIPpipeMerged` workflows via the `ChIPpipeLauncher` decision workflow, using the `ChIPconfig.yaml` file.

`ChIPpipe` creates peak calls, alignments and signal tracks. Output files are named according to `fileNamesFrom` list in the config file.

`ChIPpipeMerged` creates merged alignments and signal tracks, and calls peaks from the merged alignments. This will be run if the `mergeBy` entry of the config is not blank, and different from the `fileNamesFrom` entry.

Both workflows generate a final summary `peakCounts.tsv` file containing the counts from each individual alignment at a merged set of peaks.

Launch the pipeline using the following command:
```bash
sbatch ChIPpipe.sh
```

## Workflows
-----------------------
# RNApipe
![](dags/RNApipeCoreDAG.png)

# ChIPpipe
![](dags/ChIPpipeDAG.png)

## Merging
-----------------------
Follow these steps to create merged signal tracks and alignment files. Requires existing `.bam` and `.bai` files for individual samples from a core run. Determines merging using the `mergeBy` parameter in `config/config.yaml`.  

## Benchmarking
-----------------------
Run the `benchmarking.py` script within `workflows/utils` in order to summarize all existing benchmark files.
```
module load python/3.6.6
python3 ./workflows/utils/benchmarking.py
```

## Unlocking
-----------------------
Use this command when you want to delete a previously generated output and re-run.
```bash
./unlock.sh RNApipe
./unlock.sh ChIPpipe
```

## To-do
-----------------------
**RNApipe**
- Make `fastqc` rule more robust to different file extensions (currently hardcoded to accept `.fastq.gz` only; new param in config?)
- Make creation of the samplesheet a rule
- (Optional) Make output for quant rule (Salmon) accept the directories themselves as outputs
- Consider trying to incorporate the mergeSignal into RNApipeCore 

**ChIPpipe + ATACpipe**
- Create ATACpipe based on ChIPpipe
- Consider editing ChIPpipe rule countMatrix to create header line from `{wildcards.sampleName}`
- Move MACS2 peak calling settings into config

**This pipeline is still in development. More information to come upon completion!**
